
=head1 NAME

SQL::DBx::Deploy - Deployment support for SQL::DB

=head1 VERSION

0.971.0. Development release.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use SQL::DB;
    use SQL::DBx::Deploy;

    my $db = SQL::DB->connect('dbi:SQLite:dbname=test');

    $db->deploy($arrayref);
    $db->deploy_file('statements.sql');
    $db->deploy_dir('/location');

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<SQL::DBx::Deploy> adds very simple forward-only (re-)deployment
support to L<SQL::DB>.  The approach is extremely simple, based on the
number of statements already executed.  SQL::DBx::Deploy keeps track of
what has been run through a table in your database called '_deploy'.

B<You should only ever add new statements to your sources!>

=head1 METHODS

=over 4

=item run_file($file, [$app])

Runs the contents of $file (which must end in F<.sql> or F<.pl>)
against the database.

=item run_dir($directory, [$app])

Runs the SQL F<*.sql> or Perl F<*.pl> files found in $directory against
the database.

=item last_deploy_id( [$app] )

Returns the count of all deployment statements for application $app (or
'default') that have already been deployed.

=item deploy($arrayref, [$app])

Deploys the statements in $arrayref which have not already been
deployed for application $app (if given, 'default' otherwise).
$arrayref is an array of hashrefs containing a single key/value pair.
The key must be either I<sql> or I<pl>. Returns a two item list: the
first value is the old deploy ID, the second value is the new deploy
id.

=item deploy_file($file, [$app])

Deploys the contents of $file (which must end in F<.sql> or F<.pl>)
using deploy().

=item deploy_dir($directory, [$app])

Loads the SQL F<*.sql> or Perl F<*.pl> files found in $directory and
deploys them using deploy().

=item deployed_table_info([ $schema ])

Returns a structure which you can save (any way you like) and use as
the C<table_info> parameter to the C<new> method of L<SQL::DB>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<SQL::DB>, L<Moo::Role>

=head1 AUTHOR

Mark Lawrence E<lt>nomad@null.netE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2011 Mark Lawrence <nomad@null.net>

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

