
=head1 NAME

SQL::DBx::SQLite - add various features to to SQLite

=head1 VERSION

0.19_13. Development release.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use SQL::DB;
    use SQL::DBx::SQLite;

    my $db = SQL::DB->connect($dsn);

    $db->sqlite_create_function_sha1;
    $db->sqlite_create_function_debug;

    $db->conn->dbh->do( q{
        CREATE TRIGGER calculate_hash AFTER UPDATE ON table
        FOR EACH ROW
        BEGIN
            UPDATE
                table
            SET
                sha1 = sha1_hex(source)
            WHERE
                id = NEW.id

            SELECT debug('select * from table');
        END;
    });

    $db->sqlite_create_sequence('table');
    my $next_id = $db->nextval('table');

    # Alternatively:

    $db->sqlite_create_function_nextval;
    $db->conn->dbh->do(q{
        INSERT INTO table VALUES(nextval('table'), 'stuff');
    });


=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<SQL::DBx::SQLite> adds various functions to the SQL syntax understood
by SQLite, using the I<sqlite_create_function()> and
I<sqlite_create_aggregate_function()> methods of L<DBD::SQLite>. It
also adds a kind of sequence API to SQL::DB for SQLite databases.

All user-defined SQLite functions are only valid for the current
session.  They must be created each time you connect to the database.
If you want that to happen automatically you might try something like
the following in your class:

    after BUILD => sub {
        my $self = shift;
        $self->sqlite_create_debug_function;
    };

=head1 METHODS

=over

=item sqlite_create_function_debug

Add a debug() function to the SQL understood by SQLite;

=item sqlite_create_function_sha1

Add various SHA1 digest functions to the SQL understood by SQLite, The
following have the same syntax in SQL as described in
L<Digest::SQLite>:

=over

=item sha1

Calculate the SQLite digest of all arguments concatenated together and
return it in a 20-byte binary form. Unfortunately it seems that the
underlying SQLite C sqlite_create_function() provides no way to
identify the result as a blob, so you must always manually cast the
result in SQL like so:

    CAST(sha1(SQLITE_EXPRESSION) AS blob)

=item sha1_hex

Calculate the SQLite digest of all arguments concatenated together and
return it in a 40-character hexidecimal form.

=item sha1_base64

Calculate the SQLite digest of all arguments concatenated together and
return it in a 27-character base64 encoded form.

=back

Also created are I<agg_sha1>, I<agg_sha1_hex> and I<agg_sha1_base64>
functions that serve the same purpose but as aggregate functions.

=item sqlite_create_function_nextval

Add a nextval() function to the SQL understood by SQLite. See also
I<sql_nextval> from L<SQL::DB>.

=item sqlite_create_function_currval

Add a currval() function to the SQL understood by SQLite. See also
I<sql_currval> from L<SQL::DB>.

=item sqlite_create_sequence( $name )

Create a sequence in the database with name $name. An "INTEGER PRIMARY
KEY AUTOINCREMENT" column in SQLite will automatically create a
sequence named after the containing table.

=item nextval( $name ) -> Int

Advance the sequence to its next value and return that value.

=item currval( $name ) -> Int

Return the current value of the sequence.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Digest::SHA1>, L<SQL::DB>, L<Moo::Role>

=head1 AUTHOR

Mark Lawrence E<lt>nomad@null.netE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2012 Mark Lawrence <nomad@null.net>

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

